Selectors reworked ... (#102)
ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base: draft-ietf-jsonpath-base.md

  country: Cyprus
  phone: ''
  email: esurov.tsp@gmail.com
- role: editor
  ins: M. Mikulicic
  name: Marko Mikulicic
  org: InfluxData, Inc.
  street: ''
  city: Pisa
  region: ''
  code: ''
  country: IT
  phone: ''

>   email: mmikulicic@gmail.com

Author: I put him back to the contributors section (sorry about that).

in ABNF as `%x2318`.

The terminology of {{-json}} applies except where clarified below.
The terms "primitive" and "structured" are used to group
the types as in {{Section 1 of -json}}.
Definitions for "Object", "Array", "Number", and "String" remain

> unchanged.

Author: That's my German (nouns with caps, adjectives with lower case).  Fixed.

The result is a list of three nodes: `{"b":0}`, `{"b":1}`, and `{"c":2}`.

Finally, `.b` selects from any input node of type object with a member name

> `b` and selects the node of the member value of the input node corresponding to that name.

Reviewer: I have a hard time understanding what a node of a value might be. This seems to be dimensionally wrong. Maybe there are too many objects in that sentence?

Reviewer 2: I agree that this is rather verbose now.  Maybe

```suggestion
Finally, `.b` selects from any input node of type object any node corresponding to
a member named `b`.
```

#### Child {#unionchild}
### Index Selector

##### Syntax
#### Syntax
{: numbered="false" toc="exclude"}

A child is a quoted string.
An index selector `'[<index>]'` addresses a single object member value or a single array element value.

~~~~ abnf
union-element = child ; see below for more alternatives
child = %x22 *double-quoted %x22 / ; "string"
        "'" *single-quoted "'"   ; 'string'

double-quoted = dq-unescaped /
          escape (
              %x22 /         ; "    quotation mark  U+0022
              "/" /          ; /    solidus         U+002F
              "\" /          ; \    reverse solidus U+005C
              "b" /          ; b    backspace       U+0008
              "f" /          ; f    form feed       U+000C
              "n" /          ; n    line feed       U+000A
              "r" /          ; r    carriage return U+000D
              "t" /          ; t    tab             U+0009
              "u" 4HEXDIG )  ; uXXXX                U+XXXX

index-selector      = "[" (quoted-member-name / element-index) "]"
~~~~

> dq-unescaped = %x20-21 / %x23-5B / %x5D-10FFFF

Author: In the next PR, I'd prefer if we could move all the expression language parts over to an expression language section.

>                           u 4HEXDIG   ;  uXXXX      U+XXXX

Author: See https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bormann-cbor-cddl-freezer-07.html#name-err6527 for how to do this right.  (Again, this should be in the expression language section.)

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't make it sense then to simple copy that into here ?

Author: Yes.
(Discuss today.)

Author: Well, slight massaging required to support both single-quoted and double-quoted strings.
I think we should leave this to a followup PR.

Author: Resolved as per interim (needed a bit more surgery than I had thought, though).

## Selectors

A JSONPath query consists of a sequence of selectors. Valid selectors are

  * Root selector `$`
  * Dot selector `.<name>`, used with object member names exclusively.
  * Dot wild card selector `.*`.
  * Index selector `[<index>]`, where `<index>` is either an (possibly negative) array index or an object member name.
  * Index wild card selector `[*]`.
  * Array slice selector `[<start>:<end>:<step>]`, where `<start>`, `<end>`, `<step>` are integer literals.
  * Nested descendants selector `..`.
  * Union selector `[<sel1>,<sel2>,...,<selN>]`, holding a comma delimited list of selectors.
  * Filter selector `[?(<expr>)]`
  * Current item selector `@`

### Root Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

> Every valid JSONPath query MUST begin with the root selector named `$`.

Author: Indeed.

~~~~ abnf
root-selector  = "$"
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}
The Argument — the root JSON value — is anonymous by nature.

> By getting assigned the universal name `$` it becomes the root node.

Author: Changed this -- a bit redundant now.

name-char = DIGIT / name-first

DIGIT           =  %x30-39              ; 0-9
ALPHA           =  %x41-5A / %x61-7A    ; A-Z / a-z
~~~~

Member names containing other characters than allowed by
`dot-selector` — such as space ` ` and minus `-`
characters — MUST NOT be used with the `dot-selector`.
(Such member names can be addressed by the
`index-selector` instead.)

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

The `dot-selector` selects the node of the member value corresponding to the member name from any JSON object. It selects no nodes from any other JSON value.

<!-- Not true, as JSONPath queries are UTF-8 texts -->
Note that the `dot-selector` follows the philosophy of JSON strings and is
allowed to contain bit sequences that cannot encode Unicode characters (a
single unpaired UTF-16 surrogate, for example).
The behaviour of an implementation is undefined for member names which do
not encode Unicode characters.

### Dot Wild Card Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The dot wild card selector has the form `.*`.

~~~~ abnf
dot-wild-selector    = "." "*"            ;  dot followed by asterisk
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

> A dot selector combined with a single asterisk is a wild card.

Author: Can't leave the "it" floating; slightly rephrased.

> A dot selector combined with a single asterisk is a wild card.

Author: Oh, you have better text below.

| \\b                | U+0008              | BS backspace                |
| \\t                | U+0009              | HT horizontal tab           |
| \\n                | U+000A              | LF line feed                |
| \\f                | U+000C              | FF form feed                |
| \\r                | U+000D              | CR carriage return          |
| \\"                | U+0022              | quotation mark              |
| \\'                | U+0027              | apostrophe                  |
| \\/                | U+002F              | slash (solidus)             |
| \\\\               | U+005C              | backslash (reverse solidus) |
| \\uXXXX            | U+XXXX              | unicode character           |
{: title="Escape Sequence Replacements" cols="c c"}

The `index-selector` applied with a `quoted-member-name` to an object
selects the node of the corresponding member value from it, if and only if that object has a member with that name.
Nothing is selected from a value which is not a object.

Array indexing via `element-index` is a way of selecting a particular array element using a zero-based index.

> For example, selector `[0]` selects the first and selector `[4]` the fifth element of a sufficiently filled array.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, selector `[0]` selects the first and selector `[4]` the fifth element of a sufficiently long array.
```

A negative `element-index` counts from the array end.
For example, selector `[-1]` selects the last and selector `[-2]` selects the last but one element of an array with at least two elements.

### Index Wild Card Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The index wild card selector has the form `[*]`.

~~~~ abnf
index-wild-selector    = "[" "*" "]"  ;  asterisk enclosed by brackets
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

> An index selector combined with a single asterisk is a wild card. It

Reviewer 4: Same issue as before - don't put syntax in the semantics section.
```suggestion
An `index-wild-selector`
```

selects all member values of an object as well as all elements of an

> array.

Reviewer 4: Should talk about selecting nodes rather than values.

Author: Fixed.

Applying the `index-wild-selector` to a primitive JSON value (such as
a number, string, or true/false/null) selects no node.

The `index-wild-selector` behaves identically to the `dot-wild-selector`.

### Array Slice Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The array slice selector has the form `[<start>:<end>:<step>]`.
It selects elements starting at index `<start>`, ending at — but
not including — `<end>`, while incrementing by `step`.

~~~~ abnf
slice-selector = "[" slice-index "]"

slice-index    = ws [start] ws ":" ws [end] [ws ":" ws [step] ws]

start          = int       ; included in selection
end            = int       ; not included in selection
step           = int       ; default: 1

ws             = *( %x20 / ; Space
                    %x09 / ; Horizontal tab
                    %x0A / ; Line feed or New line
                    %x0D ) ; Carriage return
~~~~

> The `slice-selector` consists of three optional decimal integers separated by colons.

Reviewer 4: @gregsdennis pointed out before that omitting the three integers always leaves behind _two_ separating colons when only one colon is valid. The ABNF is correct, but the description here contradicts it.

Author: Wait, the step is optional in the syntax, too.

Reviewer 4: The ABNF syntax is correct (last time I looked!). It's just the above sentence which is misleading.

  * Filter selector `[?(<expr>)]`
  * Current item selector `'@'`

### Root Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

Every valid JSONPath query MUST begin with the root selector named `'$'`.

~~~~ abnf
root-selector  = "$"
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}
The Argument &mdash; the root JSON value &ndash; is anonymous by nature. By getting assigned the universal name `'$'` it becomes the root node.

### Dot Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

A dot selector starts with a dot `'.'` followed by an object's member name.

~~~~ abnf
dot-selector    = "." dot-member-name
dot-member-name = 1*(
                      DIGIT /
                      ALPHA /
                      "_"   /           ; _
                      %x80-10FFFF       ; any non-ASCII Unicode character
                    )
DIGIT           =  %x30-39              ; 0-9
ALPHA           =  %x41-5A / %x61-7A    ; A-Z / a-z
~~~~

Member names containing other characters than allowed by
`dot-selector` — such as space `' '` and minus `'-'`
characters — MUST NOT be used with the `dot-selector`.
(Such member names can be addressed by the

> `index-selector` instead.)

Reviewer 2: Having this as a parenthetical seems good to me. 👍

Note that the `dot-selector` follows the philosophy of JSON strings and is
allowed to contain bit sequences that cannot encode Unicode characters (a
single unpaired UTF-16 surrogate, for example).
The behaviour of an implementation is undefined for member names which do
not encode Unicode characters.

### Dot Wild Card Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The dot wild card selector has the form `'.*'`.

~~~~ abnf
dot-wild-selector    = "." "*"            ;  dot followed by asterisk
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

A dot selector combined with a single asterisk is a wild card.
It selects all member values of an object as well as all elements of
an array.
Applying the `dot-wild-selector` to a primitive JSON value (number,
string, or true/false/null) selects no value.

### Index Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

An index selector `'[<index>]'` addresses a single object member value or a single array element value.

~~~~ abnf
index-selector      = "[" (quoted-member-name / element-index) "]"
~~~~

Applying the `index-selector` to an object value, a `quoted-member-name` string is required. JSONPath allows it to be enclosed in _single_ or _double_ quotes.

~~~~ abnf

> quoted-member-name  =  %x22 *double-quoted %x22 /       ; "string"

Reviewer 2: Suggested in meeting to use `string-literal`

> quoted-member-name  =  %x22 *double-quoted %x22 /       ; "string"

Author: Resolved as per interim.

escapable           = (
                          b /         ;  BS backspace U+0008
                          t /         ;  HT horizontal tab U+0009
                          n /         ;  LF line feed U+000A
                          f /         ;  FF form feed U+000C
                          r /         ;  CR carriage return U+000D
                          / /         ;  /  slash (solidus)
                          \ /         ;  \  backslash (reverse solidus)
                          u 4HEXDIG   ;  uXXXX      U+XXXX
                      )
HEXDIG              = %x41-46 /           ;  A-F
                      %x61-66             ;  a-f
~~~~

Applying the `index-selector` to an array, a numerical `element-index` is required. JSONPath allows it to be negative.

~~~~ abnf
element-index   = int                             ; decimal integer

int             = ["-"] ( "0" / (DIGIT1 *DIGIT) ) ; -  optional
DIGIT1          = %x31-39                         ; 1-9 non-zero digit
~~~~

Notes:
1. `double-quoted` strings follow JSON in {{RFC8259}}.
   `single-quoted` strings follow an analogous pattern.
2. An `element-index` is an integer (in base 10).

> 3. The syntax does not allow octal-like integers with leading zeros such as `01` or `-01`.

Reviewer 3: Glyn already suggested to phrase instead: integer base-10

> 3. The syntax does not allow octal-like integers with leading zeros such as `01` or `-01`.

Reviewer 2: Right, but that's in point 2.  We still highlight "octal-like" integers in point 3.  Is there a reason we want to call attention to octal over other common number bases?

> 3. The syntax does not allow octal-like integers with leading zeros such as `01` or `-01`.

Author: Please check as now updated.

> 3. The syntax does not allow octal-like integers with leading zeros such as `01` or `-01`.

Reviewer 2: You just added "As in JSON numbers..."

>3. As in JSON numbers, the syntax does not allow octal-like integers with leading zeros such as `01` or `-01`.

That doesn't address my concern at all.  My question is about the callout of _octal_ and exclusion of other number bases such as binary and hexadecimal.

| \\n                | U+000A              | LF line feed                |
| \\f                | U+000C              | FF form feed                |
| \\r                | U+000D              | CR carriage return          |
| \\"                | U+0022              | quotation mark              |
| \\'                | U+0027              | apostrophe                  |
| \\/                | U+002F              | slash (solidus)             |
| \\\\               | U+005C              | backslash (reverse solidus) |
| \\uXXXX            | U+XXXX              | unicode character           |
{: title="Escape Sequence Replacements" cols="c c"}

The `index-selector` applied with a `quoted-member-name` to an object selects the corresponding value from it, if and only if that object has a member with that name.
Nothing is selected from a value which is not a object.

Array indexing via `element-index` is a way of selecting a particular array element using a zero-based index.
For example, selector `[0]` selects the first and selector `[4]` the fifth element of a sufficiently filled array.

A negative `element-index` counts from the array end.

> For example, selector `[-1]` selects the last and selector `[-2]` selects the last but one element of an array with at least two elements.

Author: penultimate

> For example, selector `[-1]` selects the last and selector `[-2]` selects the last but one element of an array with at least two elements.

Author: We didn't discuss this, so I left it, but "penultimate" really is the way to go.

array.
Applying the `index-wild-selector` to a primitive JSON value (such as
a number, string, or true/false/null) selects no node.

The `index-wild-selector` behaves identically to the `dot-wild-selector`.

### Array Slice Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The array slice selector has the form `[<start>:<end>:<step>]`.
It selects elements starting at index `<start>`, ending at — but
not including — `<end>`, while incrementing by `step`.

~~~~ abnf
slice-selector = "[" slice-index "]"

slice-index    = ws [start] ws ":" ws [end] [ws ":" ws [step] ws]

start          = int       ; included in selection
end            = int       ; not included in selection
step           = int       ; default: 1

ws             = *( %x20 / ; Space
                    %x09 / ; Horizontal tab
                    %x0A / ; Line feed or New line
                    %x0D ) ; Carriage return
~~~~

The `slice-selector` consists of three optional decimal integers separated by colons.

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

The `slice-selector` was inspired by the slice operator of ECMAScript 4 (ES4), which was deprecated in 2014 and later adopted by Python.

> 

Reviewer 3: Seems to be misleading (I know my wording). It was surely adopted by Python before 2014. So skip `later`.

Author: A quick search finds it in Python in 2009, but I didn't check further.
Changed to ", and that of Python".

BTW, do we support negative steps?

Reviewer 2: The current test suite and the comparison matrix _does_ have negative step cases.

Reviewer 4: @cabo Negative steps are also supported in the spec. See for example Table 4.

Author: Thanks.  It just occurred to me as the semantics section needs to gain more content.

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The array slice selector has the form `'[<start>:<end>:<step>]'`.
It selects elements starting at index `<start>`, ending at — but

> not including — `<end>`, while incrementing by `step`.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't quite match up with what's actually going on.  Hence [the issue](https://github.com/jsonpath-standard/jsonpath-compliance-test-suite/issues/3) in the compliance test suite I raised.

I was thinking it worked as you've written, but the referenced algorithm doesn't work exactly that way.

Author: We didn't discuss this, so I left it for a future PR

neg-op       = "!"                                  ; not operator
logical-op   = "||" / "&&"                          ; logical operator
comp-expr    = (rel-path-val /
                calc-val) [(comp-op comparable /  ; comparison
                            regex-op regex     /  ; RegEx test
                            in-op container )]    ; containment test
comp-op      = "==" / "!=" /                        ; comparison ...
               "<"  / ">"  /                        ; operators
               "<=" / ">="
regex-op     = "~="                                 ; RegEx match
in-op        = " in "                               ; in operator
comparable   = number / quoted-string /             ; primitive ...
               true / false / null /                ; values only
               rel-path-val /                       ; descendant value
               calc_val /                           ; calculated value
               json-path                            ; any value

rel-path-val = "@" *(dot-selector / index-selector)
calc_val     = func "(" [rel-path-val / json-path] ")"
func         = "index"
~~~~

Notes:

> * Parenthesis can be used with `boolean-expr` for grouping. So filter selection syntax in the original proposal `'[?(<expr)]'` is naturally contained in the current lean syntax `'[?<expr]'` as a special case.

Author: What is the meaning of `<expr`?
Missing `>`?

Reviewer 3: yes ... simple typo

thanks a lot

fit in the implementation's representation of an integer, the implementation
MUST raise an error.

### Descendant Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The descendant selector starts with a double dot `..` and can be
followed by an object member name (similar to the `dot-selector`),
by an `index-selector` acting on objects or arrays, or by a wild card.

~~~~ abnf
descendant-selector = ".." ( dot-member-name      /  ; ..<name>
                             index-selector       /  ; ..[<index>]
                             index-wild-selector  /  ; ..[*]
                             "*"                     ; ..*
                           )
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

> The `descendant-selector` is inspired by ECMAScript for XML (E4X). It selects object members and array elements in a recursive descent process.

Author: I didn't see this yet when I made a different change.  Please check...

fit in the implementation's representation of an integer, the implementation
MUST raise an error.

### Descendant Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The descendant selector starts with a double dot `..` and can be
followed by an object member name (similar to the `dot-selector`),
by an `index-selector` acting on objects or arrays, or by a wild card.

~~~~ abnf
descendant-selector = ".." ( dot-member-name      /  ; ..<name>
                             index-selector       /  ; ..[<index>]
                             index-wild-selector  /  ; ..[*]
                             "*"                     ; ..*
                           )
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

The `descendant-selector` is inspired by ECMAScript for XML (E4X). It

> selects the nodes of object member values and array elements in a recursive descent process.

Reviewer 4: The descendant selector should select all primitive values which are part of the subtree of the input node. For example, `..*` applied to the argument `true` should produce `[true]` even though there are no object members or array elements in the argument.

The descendant selector should also select _all_ object members and _all_ array elements (the current wording could permit some to be omitted).
```suggestion
It selects the node and all its descendants..
```

Author: To do: Define "descendants" (making sure that member values are, but member names aren't).

### Union Selector

#### Syntax

The union selector is syntactically related to the `index-selector`. It contains multiple, comma separated entries.

~~~~ abnf
union-selector = "[" ws union-entry 1*(ws "," ws union-entry) ws "]"

union-entry    =  ( quoted-member-name /
                    element-index      /
                    slice-index
                  )
~~~~

> Task (T1): This, besides slice-index, is currently one of only two
> places in the document that mentions whitespace.  Whitespace needs
> to be handled throughout the ABNF syntax.  Room Consensus at the
> 2021-06-15 interim was that JSONPath generally is generous with
> allowing insignificant whitespace throughout.  Minimizing the impact
> of the many whitespace insertion points by choosing a rule name such
> as "S" was mentioned.  Some conventions will probably help with

> > minimizing the number of places where S needs to be inserted.

Reviewer 4: For the record, "ws" is far more memorable than "S".

Author: If you are stuck in an ABNF littered with them, S is sufficiently memorable...

(WS really should be for mandatory whitespace, OWS is optional whitespace, but that is too long here.)

Reviewer: I never got that color thing people associate with space - maybe I should buy me a printer and do some archaeology? Just  `S` or `SP` should do nicely.

Reviewer 3: I am fine with "S" (minimalistic :). Is there a convention to write constants in capitals?

Reviewer 2: Do we need to make concession for multiple whitespace chars (e.g. `*ws` or `*S`), or is that implicitly covered?

Author: RFC 8610 defines this as:

     S = *WS
     WS = SP / NL
     SP = %x20
     NL = COMMENT / CRLF
     COMMENT = ";" *PCHAR CRLF
     PCHAR = %x20-7E / %x80-10FFFD
     CRLF = %x0A / %x0D.0A

I'm not sure we need to support comments in JSONPath (that is a serious question though), but if you remove that, pesky details like isolated CRs are fixed, too (and then CDDL simply disallows HTs, which may not be popular here).

Next PR...

Author: Oh, and I'm not sure these can all be called constants, but there is indeed a tendency in ABNF usage to give token-level (scanner) productions such as DIGIT, ALPHA, WS, ... upper case names.

The current item is selected if and only if the result is `true`.

~~~~ abnf

boolean-expr = logical-expr
logical-expr = ([neg-op] primary-expr) / logical-or-expr
neg-op       = "!"                                  ; not operator
primary-expr = "(" logical-or-expr ")"
logical-or-expr = logical-and-expr *["||" logical-and-expr]
logical-and-expr = comp-expr *["&&" comp-expr]

comp-expr    = (rel-path-val) [(comp-op comparable /  ; comparison
                            regex-op regex     /  ; RegEx test
                            in-op container )]    ; containment test
comp-op      = "==" / "!=" /                        ; comparison ...
               "<"  / ">"  /                        ; operators
               "<=" / ">="
regex-op     = "~="                                 ; RegEx match
in-op        = " in "                               ; in operator
comparable   = number / string-literal /            ; primitive ...
               true / false / null /                ; values only
               rel-path-val /                       ; descendant value
               json-path                            ; any value

> rel-path-val = "@" *(dot-selector / index-selector)

Reviewer 4: We also need absolute path values such as `$.foo`.

Author: Todo for next PR...

Reviewer 3: this is a `json-path` then.

Author: That is a simple solution that we can refine later.  Put it in.

fit in the implementation's representation of an integer, the implementation
MUST raise an error.

### Descendant Selector

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The descendant selector starts with a double dot `..` and can be
followed by an object member name (similar to the `dot-selector`),
by an `index-selector` acting on objects or arrays, or by a wild card.

~~~~ abnf
descendant-selector = ".." ( dot-member-name      /  ; ..<name>
                             index-selector       /  ; ..[<index>]
                             index-wild-selector  /  ; ..[*]
                             "*"                     ; ..*
                           )
~~~~

#### Semantics
{: unnumbered}

> The `descendant-selector` is inspired by ECMAScript for XML (E4X). It
> It selects the node and all its descendants..

Reviewer 2: Repitition of "It" and extra period (ironically).

```suggestion
The `descendant-selector` is inspired by ECMAScript for XML (E4X).
It selects the node and all its descendants.
```

Author: Fixed.

~~~~ abnf
filter-selector    = "[?" boolean-expr "]"
~~~~

During iteration process each array element or object member is visited and its value — accessible via symbol `@` — or one of its descendants — uniquely defined by a relative path — is tested against a boolean expression `boolean-expr`.

The current item is selected if and only if the result is `true`.

~~~~ abnf

boolean-expr = logical-expr
logical-expr = ([neg-op] primary-expr) / logical-or-expr
neg-op       = "!"                                  ; not operator
primary-expr = "(" logical-or-expr ")"
logical-or-expr = logical-and-expr *["||" logical-and-expr]
logical-and-expr = comp-expr *["&&" comp-expr]

comp-expr    = (rel-path-val) [(comp-op comparable /  ; comparison
                            regex-op regex     /  ; RegEx test
                            in-op container )]    ; containment test
comp-op      = "==" / "!=" /                        ; comparison ...
               "<"  / ">"  /                        ; operators
               "<=" / ">="
regex-op     = "~="                                 ; RegEx match

> in-op        = " in "                               ; in operator

Reviewer 3: For the next PR:

Thinking a bit more about `in-op` leads me to the conclusion, that this operator makes sense only for arrays.
`'key' in $.obj` is equivalent to `$.obj.key` and `'key' in <literal-object>` seems to be useless. I see no other rational here. Someone else ?

Author: there is still the "enum" use case, as in `$.service_level in ["silver", "gold"]`, which is an abbreviation for `$.service_level == "silver" || $.service_level == "gold"`.

Reviewer 3: well ... this is the `in <array>` use case.
